The challenge of offering a naturalistic account of the production of biological order and complexity from the mass of inert stellar ejecta comprising its material substratum is, arguably, the preeminent outstanding task of the biological sciences. While closely allied with questions of the origin and nature of life itself, these seemingly more fundamental issues have been addressed more satisfactorily from a materialist perspective (e.g. Kaufmann's account of biological origins and Morenge's tripartite definition of life) than the conundrum of how the rich diversity of terrestrial life can be produced from similar complements of macromolecules. The difficulty of this task is no more apparent than when one takes stock of the history of attempts to undertake it. The wreckage of vitalist theory, exemplified by Hans Driech's appeals to the Aristotlean metaphysical concept of entelchy (made after he abandoned his pioneering embryological studies on sea urchins), smoulders on as a warning to others who would offer nonreductionist accounts of the development of biological order- indeed, "vitalism" is still a serious charge levied at theorists today. By contrast, the mute edifice of Nobel laureate Ilya Prigogine's attempts to offer a thermodynamic explanation for the persistence of molecular biological order in the face of the seemingly inexorable workings of the Second Law (as "dissipative structures") is rarely remembered at all. No less a mind than Erwin Schroedinger considered the production of such a thermodynamic account critically important, going as far as to introduce the spurious concept of "negentropy" to do so. Almost this entire research program, once the focus of dedicated institutes, has been distilled to the (now) apparently trivial observation that organisms exist in open thermodynamic exchange with their environments, importing nutritive energy and exporting entropy in the form of heat. That some of the greatest scientific minds of the 20th century should have misstated the problem of biological order to this extent, such that uncounted careers were spent in pursuit of truths readily available to any farmhand observing the condensing breath of foraging cows on a cold morning, should give us pause.
The inglorious ends met by these forays are still more remarkable when viewed next to the stunning success of the so-called "reductionist" program pursued by 20th century molecular biology, which we may define as the effort to explain biological systems in terms of macromolecules (at a variety of levels of organisation). Virtually all of the concrete, material answers that the biological sciences now provide regarding what life is and how it functions are derived from or fleshed out by this body of work. The mechanistic vision of biological function, in which cellular macromolecules are understood to be nanomachines with functionally defined parts (e.g. peptide motifs) making up "factories" in precisely bounded subcellular compartments, is pervasive. Crick's narrow formulation of the "central dogma" of molecular biology is now 60 years old and, unlike Watson's sloppier diagrammatic exposition, has not been overturned by subsequent results. The fundamental idea of informational flow (defined in terms of primary sequence) from DNA to RNA to protein remains at the core of our theories of cellular function. The most serviceable accounts of the origin of life, beginning with autocatalytic nucleic acid reactions, are derived from the observed direction of macromolecular informational flow and not from any Darwinian evolutionary or ecological account. We still speak, in at least a loose sense, of genetic "programs" and developmental "trajectories". Theodore Dobzhansky's famous dictum that "nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution", offered at a time of growing anxiety among evolutionary biologists about the increasing dominance of the molecular program, is today obviously quite wrong- it is the prosaic results of molecular methods that have illuminated evolutionary theory to a far greater extent than vice versa. Indeed, although it is now a shibboleth among evolutionary biologists that biological systems cannot be said to be directed toward ends in any meaningful sense, arising as they do from random variation subjected to natural selection, they are unable to offer any material account of this process without referring to the work of molecular biologists who casually refer to their subject in explicitly teleological terms (proteins have functions, cells are agents that pursue directed behaviours, etc.)!
This last point, that molecular biology is laden with explanatory metaphors and cognitive frames that are formally illegitimate, is not a trivial one. The concepts of mechanism and trajectory, for instance, have been imported from deterministic Newtonian dynamics. We may describe a protein as a machine, or describe the mechanism which gives rise to some cellular behaviour, which implies a similarly deterministic system. When pressed, however, we readily concede that this is merely a descriptive conceit; it is unnecessary to specify where a lathe is to know with a good deal of precision what it does, while the subcellular context of a protein can radically alter its functional properties, for instance. Likewise, a trajectory refers to the path a particle takes in space, which can be known precisely by specifying an initial condition and the time-reversible equations of motion it is subject to. We use this term only in the loosest sense when we speak of a cell following a developmental trajectory through some differentiation "phase space"- this process is generally neither subject to precise prediction given initial conditions, nor is it reversible in time. The use of these conceptual threads, mainly drawn from the epistemological framework of 19th century physics and 20th century information theory, while obviously not literal, has an effect on the resulting fabric of the description woven from their use. The widespread recognition that these descriptions can elide or even conceal much of the complexity and diversity of biological phenomena, often arising from apparently stochastic or chaotic processes, has, in part, given rise to the accusation that the molecular biological paradigm is a reductionist one.
This accusation is not completely unwarranted. The success of this paradigm gave rise to the hubris of the pregenomic era, when many were convinced that full genome sequencing would be sufficient to totally explain the organism supposedly specified by the information contained therein. This idea only makes sense in the context of a monomaniacal focus on a supposed informational "program" specified in nucleic acids being rigidly executed by proteinaceous "machines". Though this was never a commitment shared broadly by biologists, its obvious and public failure in the early part of this century has cemented the sense that molecular biology is inadequate in and of itself to explain the full range and diversity of biological phenomena. We are thus left with the ironic situation that the most successful approach to biological science in history is now regarded as being, in significant ways, fundamentally wrong about its subject; meanwhile exhortations to "holistic thinking" about biological systems offer little in the way of thoroughgoing alternatives or replacements to this approach, and tend to minimise or ignore the fraught history of previous "holistic" theories mentioned above.
The title page of this thesis reveals a significant symptom of this situation. The degree that I hope will be awarded for this work is nominally in "Cell and Systems Biology". "Systems biology" is now a pervasive formulation, the term "Systems" being derived from complexity theory, which studies complex systems, so-called because of the difficulty in modelling them. Over the last two decades there has been a profusion of new departments, journals, endowed chairs, and so on with this title. "Molecular biology" is, by contrast, now vanishingly rare as a descriptor. A cynic might regard this as mere intellectual fashion, the adoption of complexity theory cant to permit the molecular biology program to go on as it had before, albeit in drag. This perception may be intensified by the general inability to articulate what is and is not "Systems" biology. As Michel Morenge has noted, "[i]n bringing together strands of research that have little in common, the study of complexity sometimes seems to mean anything new and incomprehensible to nonspecialists that comes from the world of physics!"
We might instead, however, interpret this as the recognition of the difficult position that practicioners of the biological sciences now find themselves in.